---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Asking the Right Question
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2022-01-27
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - Learning
---

In a learning environment, teachers typically encourage their students to ask questions with the assurance that they shouldn’t feel stupid for not understanding something immediately. This is because teachers feel an obligation to help their students learn. In contrast to this, other students do not have this obligation and will not hesitate to laugh at the stupidity that is displayed by one of their peers when they ask a ridiculous question. Asking a question on the internet is a lot like asking a question in a classroom full of peers with no teacher. This is why it’s important to be able to ask good questions that will illicit helpful responses. Unless there is someone who’s job it is to educate you, no one is obligated to help you, and asking a lazy question will make most people not want to.
<h2>A Good Example</h2>
<a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18496282/why-do-i-get-a-label-can-only-be-part-of-a-statement-and-a-declaration-is-not-a/18496437#18496437">Here</a> is an example of a question posted to stackoverflow that happened to receive a lot of engagement and a couple very thorough answers. The user included in their title the error they received and a brief description of its context. In the body of the post, they included a brief and simplified code snippet that recreates the error as well as the name of the compiler that they used. As a bonus, the user describes a workaround they found, though it still left them with the question of why they were getting the error to begin with. The reason these attributes make it a good question is because they make it clear, concise, and specific. The answers provided further proved the quality of the question since the problem encountered was actually due to a quirk of the C programming language grammar. The question was not something that could have been easily answered through a bit of research or some basic education on the subject.
<h2>A Bad Example</h2>
Questions that illicit negative responses may do so for a variety of reasons. An article titled “How to Ask Questions the Smart Way” written by Eric Steven Raymond provides tips on how to get positive responses to online inquiries as well as advice on what not to do. A couple of my favorite examples of what not to do are posting entire homework problems and using poor grammar. Raymond describes a lot of specific things to avoid doing, but they can mostly be summarized with “don’t be lazy.” <a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/70889160/how-does-the-queue-data-type-is-implemented">Here</a> is an example of a question posted to stackoverflow that did not get positive responses. The subject line of this question, “how does the queue data type is implemented”, uses atrocious grammar and isn’t capitalized or punctuated. This makes the asker seem stupid and lazy. Furthermore, the body of this question is very obviously a homework problem, with point values for each part of the question included. The only response to this question was a suggestion that they read introductory material on the topic.
<h2>Footnote</h2>
I personally try not to ask a lot of questions in my studies. I think this may be in part due to an old mentor of mine who would frequently respond to my questions by saying “I’ll tell you what I always do: RTFM” (Read the f-ing manual). This was a great response given the context, as we literally had a digital library of manuals that described every part of our jobs. In school, I still do ask questions occasionally, but I typically only do so in situations where I have a near-complete understanding of the material. If someone is far behind and has little understanding of the topic being discussed, there’s hardly a good question that can be asked other than “can you teach me everything I don’t know?”
